docs(logs): document batching processor triggers (#5261)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification: specification/logs/sdk.md

#### Batching processor

This is an implementation of the `LogRecordProcessor` which creates batches
of `LogRecord`s and passes the export-friendly `ReadableLogRecord`
representations to the configured `LogRecordExporter`.

The processor MUST synchronize calls to `LogRecordExporter`'s `Export`
to make sure that they are not invoked concurrently.

> A batch SHOULD be exported when any of the following conditions are met:

Reviewer: AND the previous export call has returned:

^ we need this wording. Copying from Trace would be good as-is.

Author: Thanks — I aligned the wording with Trace, including the requirement that the previous export call has returned, adapted for LogRecord batching, and added the required Unreleased changelog entry. I pushed `d439a6f`; the PR checks are running.

#### Batching processor

This is an implementation of the `LogRecordProcessor` which creates batches
of `LogRecord`s and passes the export-friendly `ReadableLogRecord`
representations to the configured `LogRecordExporter`.

The processor MUST synchronize calls to `LogRecordExporter`'s `Export`
to make sure that they are not invoked concurrently.

The processor SHOULD invoke the `LogRecordExporter`'s `Export` when any of
the following happens AND the previous export call has returned:

- `scheduledDelayMillis` after the processor is constructed.
- `scheduledDelayMillis` after the previous export timer ends, OR the previous
  export completes, OR the first `LogRecord` is added to the queue after the
  previous export timer ends or previous batch completes.
- The queue contains `maxExportBatchSize` or more `LogRecord`s.
- `ForceFlush` is called.
- `Shutdown` is called.

If the queue is empty when an export is triggered, the processor MAY export

> an empty batch.

Reviewer 2: An alternative approach for us to consider:

```suggestion
If the queue is empty when an export is triggered, the processor SHOULD invoke the `LogRecordExporter`'s `Export` and provide an empty batch.
```

In this way the exporter can decide to simply do nothing when the input batch is empty, or the exporter can do some maintenance job (e.g. just sending some heartbeat, so the backend would be able to tell "I don't see data because there is no data, and my app is alive" versus "I don't see data, my app might be dead").

Reviewer: I like the SHOULD export with empty batch behavior too. Since this was not specified before for Log SDK, I think it is okay. One thing to note is - the wording is copied as-is from Tracing sdk spec, which is marked stable - changing a MAY to SHOULD might not be allowed for existing stable spec.

Author: Adopted — the empty-queue clause now reads: "the processor SHOULD invoke the `LogRecordExporter`'s `Export` and provide an empty batch, so the exporter can decide how to handle it." Pushed as `5acfb3f`.

Author: Good point about the stable Trace wording — the Trace SDK text is untouched; this change is only in the Logs SDK block this PR adds (Logs SDK batching wording was previously unspecified), so the stable-spec constraint does not apply here. The clause now reads: "the processor SHOULD invoke the `LogRecordExporter`'s `Export` and provide an empty batch". Pushed as `5acfb3f`.

#### Batching processor

This is an implementation of the `LogRecordProcessor` which creates batches
of `LogRecord`s and passes the export-friendly `ReadableLogRecord`
representations to the configured `LogRecordExporter`.

The processor MUST synchronize calls to `LogRecordExporter`'s `Export`
to make sure that they are not invoked concurrently.

> The processor SHOULD export a batch when any of the following happens AND the

Reviewer 2: > The processor SHOULD export a batch...

This processor will call `exporter.export(batch)`, it is the exporter's job to export the batch.
Maybe rephrase this to:

```suggestion
The processor SHOULD invoke the `LogRecordExporter`'s `Export` when any of the following happens AND the
```

Author: Adopted — the trigger line now reads "The processor SHOULD invoke the `LogRecordExporter`'s `Export` when any of the following happens AND the previous export call has returned". Pushed as `28914fcf`.

previous export call has returned:

> - `scheduledDelayMillis` after the processor is constructed OR the first

Reviewer 2: Hmm, why do we want to have "OR the first ..."? Could the OR part be removed?

Author: Removed the OR: the first trigger is now just "`scheduledDelayMillis` after the processor is constructed". A first record arriving after that timer has ended is still covered by the third alternative of the second trigger ("the first `LogRecord` is added to the queue after the previous export timer ends"), so no record goes unexported. Pushed as `28914fcf`.

Reviewer 2: Thank you!

- `scheduledDelayMillis` after the previous export timer ends, OR the previous
  export completes, OR the first `LogRecord` is added to the queue after the

>   previous export timer ends or previous batch completes.

Reviewer 3: I fail to understand this bullet

"OR the previous export completes" is this correct? Why "OR"? Is it not about "AND the previous export call has returned:" which was defined previously?

What is an export timer? When does it reset?

Reviewer 3: Also note that  the preceding MUST already ensures that Export calls are not concurrent, so “AND the previous export call has returned” is redundant if it only restates serialization.

Could we separate export triggers from timer-restart semantics? For example:

```
The processor SHOULD invoke the `LogRecordExporter`'s `Export` when:
 
- the scheduled-delay timer expires;
- the queue contains `maxExportBatchSize` or more `LogRecord`s;
- `ForceFlush` is called; or
- `Shutdown` is called.

If a trigger occurs while an `Export` call is in progress,
the processor SHOULD service the trigger after that call returns.
```

  previous export timer ends or previous batch completes.
- The queue contains `maxExportBatchSize` or more `LogRecord`s.
- `ForceFlush` is called.
- `Shutdown` is called.

If the queue is empty when an export is triggered, the processor MAY export

> an empty batch OR skip the export and consider it to be completed immediately.

Reviewer 2: Why do we want to make this flexible/complicated?

Author: Simplified: the empty-queue clause now just says "the processor MAY export an empty batch" and drops the "OR skip the export and consider it to be completed immediately" alternative. Not exporting is still permitted by MAY, so no behavior is lost. Pushed as `28914fcf`.
